# grateful 0.3.0

* Now possible to scan and cite dependencies from a package DESCRIPTION file (#62). Use `pkgs = c("Depends", "Imports", "Suggests", "LinkingTo")` or combinations of them to choose which dependencies to cite.

* Now possible to scan and cite dependencies from a single R script, 'Rmarkdown' or 'Quarto' document #65. Just provide the path to the file to the `pkgs` argument. 

* Now possible to customise the language of citation paragraphs (#55), thanks to new arguments to `cite_packages`: `text.start`, `text.pks` and `text.RStudio`.

* New logical argument `skip.missing` allows the user to skip missing packages (those used somewhere in the project but not currently installed) #54.


# grateful 0.2.12

* Fix generation of citation keys under R 4.5.0 (issue #59).

# grateful 0.2.11

* Revise tests (issue #57).

# grateful 0.2.10

* Add support for LaTeX output (thanks @patrick-weiss for the suggestion). Use `out.format = "tex-document"` to obtain a full LaTeX document, or `out.format = "tex-fragment"` to produce just a fragment citing packages to be copied into another existing LaTeX document.

# grateful 0.2.9

* Match package names with citation keys explicitly, rather than relying on sorting.

# grateful 0.2.8

* Fix problem with citation keys containing non-alphanumeric characters (-) (issue #44, thanks @jkylearmstrong).

# grateful 0.2.7

* Enable citing Rstudio with 'table' output format (issue #41).

# grateful 0.2.6

* Explain how to cite R together with a given list of packages (issue #37).

# grateful 0.2.5

* Fixed a bug in writing passive voice paragraph when generating a citation report (issue #39).

# grateful 0.2.4

* Fixed a bug in package doc (cf. https://github.com/r-lib/roxygen2/issues/1491).

# grateful 0.2.3

* Fixed a bug when downloading 'dependent' citation styles from the official repository.


# grateful 0.2.2

* Removed some tests that were likely to fail in the future (issue #36)

# grateful 0.2.1

* Citation paragraph can now be written in passive voice, thanks to @jmclawson


# grateful 0.2.0

* Added `omit` argument to exclude some packages from the citation report. 

* Argument `cite.grateful` has been removed, use `omit = c("grateful")` instead. 

* Increased robustness: more tests and argument checks added.


# grateful 0.1.13

* `out.dir` must now be provided by the user (`out.dir = getwd()` not allowed per CRAN policy)

* `Rmd.file` and `out.name` arguments to `cite_packages` have been fused into a single `out.file` argument

* CITATION now uses bibentry rather than citEntry.



# grateful 0.1.12

* Fully revised documentation and README, including examples of running grateful with Quarto.

* Added many tests

* When using grateful within 'R Markdown', it is no longer necessary to specify 
chunk option `results = "asis"` (thanks to @connorp)


# grateful 0.1.10

* Fixed bug when matching citekeys with package names containing punctuation characters.

# grateful 0.1.9

* Fixed potential bug when matching package names with citation keys. Now using more strict regex.

# grateful 0.1.7

* New option output = "table" to produce a table with package names, version, and citation, 
to be used within an 'R Markdown' document.

# grateful 0.1.5

* Now including package versions, besides package name.

* For packages specifying more than one reference in their CITATION file, use all of them.

* Rather than a list of package names, grateful now returns a text paragraph citing R and all the used packages, ready to be pasted in a manuscript or report.

* Now including base R citation in all cases. Can optionally add RStudio too.

* grateful can now be used within 'R Markdown'. Including a chunk with `cite_packages(output = "paragraph")` will introduce a paragraph with in-text citations of R and the used packages, and their citations will be formatted when rendering the 'R Markdown' document.

* It is also possible to cite particular packages using their BibTeX keys generated by grateful. Or include them in the reference list without citing them in-text, using the new `nocite_references()` function.

* New argument `cite.tidyverse` to collapse citations of all used tidyverse packages into a single citation to 'tidyverse'.

* New argument `dependencies` to include package dependencies in the citation list.
